
[main]
version                        = 0.5.3b

[video]
fullscreen                     = true
screen_w                       = 1024
screen_h                       = 768
bbp_mode                       = 32

[stars]
star_scale                     = 3.8
star_twinkle_amount            = 1.5
max_mag_star_name              = 1.5

[gui]
flag_show_fps                  = true
flag_menu                      = true
flag_help                      = false
flag_infos                     = false
flag_utc_time                  = false
gui_base_color                 = 0.6
gui_text_color                 = 0.1

[navigation]
flag_follow_earth              = true
date                           = 08/11/1999
time                           = 11:15:00

[landscape]
landscape_number               = 2
flag_ground                    = true
flag_horizon                   = true
flag_fog                       = true
flag_atmosphere                = false

[viewing]
flag_constellation_drawing     = false
flag_constellation_name        = false
flag_azimutal_grid             = false
flag_equatorial_grid           = false
flag_equator                   = false
flag_ecliptic                  = false
flag_cardinal_points           = true

[astro]
flag_stars                     = true
flag_star_name                 = true
flag_planets                   = true
flag_planets_name              = true
flag_nebula                    = true
flag_nebula_name               = false
flag_milky_way                 = true
