\chapterimage{chapter-bg.png} % Chapter heading image

\chapter{Sky Guide}

This section lists some astronomical objects that can be located using
Stellarium. All of them can be seen with the naked eye or binoculars.
Since many astronomical objects have more than one name (often having a
'proper name', a 'common name' and various catalogue numbers), the table
lists the name as it appears in Stellarium --- use this name when using
Stellarium's search function --- and any other commonly used names.

The Location Guide column gives brief instructions for finding each
object using nearby bright stars or groups of stars when looking at the
real sky --- a little time spent learning the major constellations
visible from your latitude will pay dividends when it comes to locating
fainter (and more interesting!) objects. When trying to locate these
objects in the night sky, keep in mind that Stellarium displays many
stars that are too faint to be visible without optical aid and even
bright stars can be dimmed by poor atmospheric conditions and light
pollution.

\begin{longtable}[c]{@{}llllll@{}}
\toprule
\emph{Stellarium Name} & \emph{Other Name(s)} & \emph{Type} &
\emph{Magnitude} & \emph{Location Guide} &
\emph{Description}\tabularnewline
Dubhe and Merak & The Pointers & Stars & 1.83, 2.36 & The two
'rightmost' of the seven stars that form the main shape of 'The Plough'
(Ursa Major). & Northern hemisphere observers are very fortunate to have
two stars that point towards Polaris which lie very close to the
northern celestial pole). Whatever the time of night or season of the
year they are always an immediate clue to the location of the pole
star.\tabularnewline
M31 & Messier 31 The Andromeda Galaxy & Spiral Galaxy & 3.4 & Find the
three bright stars that constitute the main part of the constellation of
Andromeda. From the middle of these look toward the constellation of
Cassiopeia. & M31 is the most distant object visible to the naked eye,
and among the few nebulae that can be seen without a telescope or
powerful binoculars. Under good conditions it appears as a large fuzzy
patch of light. It is a galaxy containing billions of stars whose
distance is roughly three million light years from Earth.\tabularnewline
The Garnet Star & Mu Cephei & Variable Star & 4.25 (Avg.) & Cephius lies
'above' the W-shape of Cassiopeia. The Garnet Star lies slightly to one
side of a point half way between 5 Cephei and 21 Cephei. & A
'supergiant' of spectral class M with a strong red colour. Given it's
name by Sir William Herschel in the 18th century, the colour is striking
in comparison to it's blue-white neighbours.\tabularnewline
4 and 5 Lyrae & Epsilon Lyrae & Double Star & 4.7 & Look near to Vega
(Alpha Lyrae), one of the brightest stars in the sky. & In binoculars
epsilon Lyrae is resolved into two separate stars. Remarkably each of
these is also a double star (although this will only be seen with a
telescope) and all four stars form a physical system.\tabularnewline
M13 & Hercules Cluster & Globular Cluster & 5.8 & Located approximately
of the way along a line from 40 to 44 Herculis. & This cluster of
hundreds of thousands of mature stars that appears as a circular 'cloud'
using the naked eye or binoculars (a large telescope is required to
resolve individual stars). Oddly the cluster appears to contain one
young star and several areas that are almost devoid of
stars.\tabularnewline
M45 & The Pleiades, The Seven Sisters & Open Cluster & 1.2 (Avg.) & Lies
a little under halfway between Aldebaran in Taurus and Almaak in
Andromeda. & Depending upon conditions, six to 9 of the blueish stars in
this famous cluster will be visible to someone with average eyesight and
in binoculars it is a glorious sight. The cluster has more than 500
members in total, many of which are shown to be surrounded by nebulous
material in long exposure photographs.\tabularnewline
Algol & The Demon Star, Beta Persei & Variable Star & 3.0 (Avg.) &
Halfway between Aldebaran in Taurus and the middle star of the 'W' of
Cassiopeia. & Once every three days or so Algol's brightness changes
from 2.1 to 3.4 and back within a matter of hours. The reason for this
change is that Algol has a dimmer giant companion star, with an orbital
period of about 2.8 days, that causes a regular partial eclipse.
Although Algol's fluctuations in magnitude have been known since at
least the 17th century it was the first to be proved to be due to an
eclipsing companion - it is therefore the prototype Eclipsing
Variable.\tabularnewline
Sirius & Alpha Canis Majoris & Star & -1.47 & Sirius is easily found by
following the line of three stars in Orion's belt southwards. & Sirius
is a white dwarf star at a comparatively close 8.6 light years. This
proximity and it's high innate luminance makes it the brightest star in
our sky. Sirius is a double star; it's companion is much dimmer but very
hot and is believed to be smaller than the earth.\tabularnewline
M44 & The Beehive, Praesepe & Open Cluster & 3.7 & Cancer lies about
halfway between the twins (Castor \& Pollux) in Gemini and Regulus, the
brightest star in Leo. The Beehive can be found between Asellus Borealis
and Asellus Australis. & There are probably 350 or so stars in this
cluster although it appears to the naked eye simply as a misty patch. It
contains a mixture of stars from red giants to white dwarf and is
estimated to be some 700 million years old.\tabularnewline
27 Cephei & Delta Cephei & Variable Star & 4.0 (Avg.) & Locate the four
stars that form the square of Cepheus. One corner of the square has two
other bright stars nearby forming a distinctive triangle --- delta is at
the head of this triangle in the direction of Cassiopeia. & Delta Cephei
gives it's name to a whole class of variables, all of which are
pulsating high-mass stars in the later stages of their evolution. Delta
Cephei is also a double star with a companion of magnitude 6.3 visible
in binoculars.\tabularnewline
M42 & Orion Nebula & Nebula & 4 & Almost in the middle of the area
bounded by Orion's belt and the stars Saiph and Rigel. & The Orion
Nebula is the brightest nebula visible in the night sky and lies at
about 1,500 light years from earth. It is a truly gigantic gas and dust
cloud that extends for several hundred light years, reaching almost
halfway across the constellation of Orion. The nebula contains a cluster
of hot young stars known as the Trapezium and more stars are believed to
be forming within the cloud.\tabularnewline
HP 62223 & La Superba, Y Canum Venaticorum & Star & 5.5 (Avg.) & Forms a
neat triangle with Phad and Alkaid in Ursa Major. & La Superba is a
'Carbon Star' --- a group of relatively cool gigantic (usually variable)
stars that have an outer shell containing high levels of carbon. This
shell is very efficient at absorbing short wavelength blue light, giving
carbon stars a distinctive red or orange tint.\tabularnewline
52 \& 53 Bootis & Nu Bootis 1 \& 2 & Double Star & 5.02, 5.02 & Follow a
line from Seginus to Nekkar and then continue for the same distance
again to arrive at this double star. & This pair are of different
spectral type and 52 Bootis, at approximately 800 light years, is twice
as far away as 53.\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}